docs/user/kafka/commandline.rst, before:

.. _kafka_tools:

Kafka Command-Line Tools
========================

The GeoMesa Kafka distribution includes a set of command-line tools for feature
management, ingest, export and debugging.

To install the tools, see :ref:`setting_up_kafka_commandline`.

Once installed, the tools should be available through the command ``geomesa-kafka``::

    $ geomesa-kafka
    INFO  Usage: geomesa-kafka [command] [command options]
      Commands:
        ...

Commands that are common to multiple back ends are described in :doc:`/user/cli/index`. The commands
here are Kafka-specific.

General Arguments
-----------------

Most commands require you to specify the connection to Kafka. This generally includes the list of
Kafka brokers and Zookeeper servers. Specify brokers with the ``--brokers`` (or ``-b``) argument, and
specify Zookeepers with ``--zookeepers`` (or ``-z``).

Kafka stores metadata under a particular path in Zookeeper - this can be thought of as a namespace
for feature types. Use ``--zkpath`` (or ``-p``) to override the default path.

To connect to :ref:`Confluent Schema Registry <confluent_kds>` topics, use ``--schema-registry``
to provide the registry URL.

Commands
--------

``create-schema``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

See :ref:`cli_create_schema` for an overview of this command.

In addition to the regular options, Kafka allows the number of partitions and the replication factor of
the Kafka topic to be specified.

======================== ==================================================
Argument                 Description
======================== ==================================================
``--partitions``         The number of partitions used for the Kafka topic
``--replication``        The replication factor for the Kafka topic
======================== ==================================================

``export``
^^^^^^^^^^

See :ref:`cli_export` for an overview of this command.

Unlike the standard ``export``, this command will not not terminate until it is cancelled (through a shell interrupt)
or until ``--max-features`` have been read. Thus, it can be used to monitor a topic.

This command differs from the ``listen`` command (below) in that it allows filtering and output in various formats.
It will also ignore ``drop`` and ``clear`` messages generated by feature deletion.

In addition to the regular options, Kafka allows control over the consumer behavior:

======================== ================================================================================
Argument                 Description
======================== ================================================================================
``--from-beginning``     Start reading messages from the beginning of the Kafka topic, instead of the end
``--num-consumers``      Number of consumers used to read the topic
======================== ================================================================================

The ``--num-consumers`` argument can be used to increase read speed. However, there can be at most one
consumer per topic partition.

The ``--from-beginning`` argument can be used to start reading the Kafka topic from the start. Otherwise,
only new messages that are sent after this command is invoked will be read.

``ingest``
^^^^^^^^^^

See :ref:`cli_ingest` for an overview of this command.

In addition to the regular options, Kafka allows the number of partitions and the replication factor of
the Kafka topic to be specified. In addition, an artificial delay can be inserted to simulate a live data stream.

======================== ==================================================
Argument                 Description
======================== ==================================================
``--partitions``         The number of partitions used for the Kafka topic
``--replication``        The replication factor for the Kafka topic
``--serialization``      The serialization format to use
``--delay``              The delay inserted between messages
======================== ==================================================

The ``--delay`` argument should be specified as a duration, in plain language. For example, ``100 millis``
or ``1 second``. The ingest will pause after creating each ``SimpleFeature`` for the specified delay.
This can be used to simulate a live data stream.

``playback``
^^^^^^^^^^^^

The playback command can simulate a data stream by replaying features from a file directly on to a Kafka Data Store.
Features are returned based on a
date attribute in the feature. For example, if replaying three features that have dates that are each one second apart,
each feature will be emitted after a delay of one second. The rate of export can be modified to speed up or slow down
the original time differences.

======================== =========================================================
Argument                 Description
======================== =========================================================
``-c, --catalog *``      The catalog table containing schema metadata
``-f, --feature-name *`` The name of the schema
``--dtg``                Date attribute to base playback on. If not specified,
                         will use the default schema date field
``--rate``               Rate multiplier to speed-up (or slow down) features being
                         returned, as a float
``--live``               Will modify the returned dates to match the current time
``--config``             Properties file used to configure the Kafka producer
``-s, --spec``           SimpleFeatureType specification as a GeoTools spec string, SFT config, or file with either
``-C, --converter``      GeoMesa converter specification as a config string, file name, or name of an available converter
``--input-format``       File format of input files (shp, csv, tsv, avro, etc). Optional, auto-detection will be attempted
``--src-list``           Input files are text files with lists of files, one per line, to ingest.
``--partitions``         The number of partitions used for the Kafka topic
``--replication``        The replication factor for the Kafka topic
``--serialization``      The serialization format to use
``--schema-registry``    URL to a Confluent Schema Registry
``<files>...``           Input files to ingest
======================== =========================================================

The playback command is an extension of the :ref:`cli_ingest` command, and accepts all the parameters outlined there.
However, playback cannot run in distributed mode.

Also, note that the input files (specified in ``--src-list`` or ``<files>...``) must be time-ordered by the ``--dtg``
attribute before ingest or the playback will not work as expected.

The ``--rate`` parameter can be used to speed up or slow down the replay. It is specified as a floating point
number. For example ``--rate 10`` will make replay ten times faster, while ``--rate 0.1`` will make replay
ten times slower.

The ``--src-list`` argument is useful when you have more files to ingest than the command line will allow you to
specify. This file instructs GeoMesa to treat input files as new-line-separated file lists. As this makes it very
easy to run ingest jobs that can take days it's recommended to split lists into reasonable chunks that can be completed
in a couple hours.

The ``--force`` argument can be used to suppress any confirmation prompts (generally from converter inference),
which can be useful when scripting commands.

The ``<files>...`` argument specifies the files to be ingested. ``*`` may be used as a wild card in file paths.
GeoMesa can handle **gzip**, **bzip** and **xz** file compression as long as the file extensions match the
compression type. GeoMesa supports ingesting files from local disks or HDFS. In addition, Amazon's S3
and Microsoft's Azure file systems are supported with a few configuration changes. See
:doc:`/user/cli/filesystems` for details. Note: The behavior of this argument is changed by the ``--src-list`` argument.

By using a single ``-`` for the input files, input data may be piped directly to the ingest command using standard
shell redirection. Note that this will only work in local mode, and will only use a single thread for ingestion.
Schema inference is disabled in this case, and progress indicators may not be entirely accurate, as the total size
isn't known up front.

For example::

    $ cat foo.csv | geomesa-accumulo ingest ... -
    $ geomesa-accumulo ingest ... - <foo.csv

``listen``
^^^^^^^^^^

This command behaves similarly to the ``export`` command (above), but it does not provide options
for filtering or output format. It will show each message on the Kafka topic, including ``drop`` and
``clear`` messages generated from feature deletion.

This command will not not terminate until it is cancelled (through a shell interrupt).

======================== ================================================================================
Argument                 Description
======================== ================================================================================
``-f, --feature-name *`` The name of the schema
``--from-beginning``     Start reading messages from the beginning of the Kafka topic, instead of the end
``--num-consumers``      Number of consumers used to read the topic
======================== ================================================================================

The ``--num-consumers`` argument can be used to increase read speed. However, there can be at most one
consumer per topic partition.

The ``--from-beginning`` argument can be used to start reading the Kafka topic from the start. Otherwise,
only new messages that are sent after this command is invoked will be read.

``migrate-zookeeper-metadata``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This command will migrate schema metadata out of Zookeeper. For additional information, see :ref:`no_zookeeper`.

======================== ================================================================================
Argument                 Description
======================== ================================================================================
``--delete``             Delete the metadata out of Zookeeper after migrating it
======================== ================================================================================

Commit message:

GEOMESA-3386 Kafka - CLI add consumer configuration needed for Zookeeper-less usage

docs/user/kafka/commandline.rst, after:

.. _kafka_tools:

Kafka Command-Line Tools
========================

The GeoMesa Kafka distribution includes a set of command-line tools for feature
management, ingest, export and debugging.

To install the tools, see :ref:`setting_up_kafka_commandline`.

Once installed, the tools should be available through the command ``geomesa-kafka``::

    $ geomesa-kafka
    INFO  Usage: geomesa-kafka [command] [command options]
      Commands:
        ...

Commands that are common to multiple back ends are described in :doc:`/user/cli/index`. The commands
here are Kafka-specific.

General Arguments
-----------------

Most commands require you to specify the connection to Kafka. This generally includes the list of
Kafka brokers, specified with ``--brokers`` (or ``-b``). Connection properties can be specified with
``--producer-config`` for producers, ``--consumer-config`` for consumers, or ``--config`` which will
be applied to both. See the official Kafka documentation for the available
`producer <https://kafka.apache.org/documentation.html#producerconfigs>`_ and
`consumer <https://kafka.apache.org/documentation.html#consumerconfigs>`_ configs.

When using Zookeeper to store GeoMesa metadata, the Zookeeper servers must be specified with ``--zookeepers`` (or ``-z``).
The Zookeeper path for storing metadata can be specified with ``--zkpath`` (or ``-p``). See :ref:`no_zookeeper` for
details on when to use Zookeeper.

When not using Zookeeper, the GeoMesa catalog topic for storing metadata may be specified with ``--catalog`` (or ``-c``).
A catalog or path can be thought of as a namespace for feature types.

To connect to :ref:`Confluent Schema Registry <confluent_kds>` topics, use ``--schema-registry``
to provide the registry URL.

Commands
--------

``create-schema``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

See :ref:`cli_create_schema` for an overview of this command.

In addition to the regular options, Kafka allows the number of partitions and the replication factor of
the Kafka topic to be specified.

======================== ==================================================
Argument                 Description
======================== ==================================================
``--partitions``         The number of partitions used for the Kafka topic
``--replication``        The replication factor for the Kafka topic
======================== ==================================================

``export``
^^^^^^^^^^

See :ref:`cli_export` for an overview of this command.

Unlike the standard ``export``, this command will not not terminate until it is cancelled (through a shell interrupt)
or until ``--max-features`` have been read. Thus, it can be used to monitor a topic.

This command differs from the ``listen`` command (below) in that it allows filtering and output in various formats.
It will also ignore ``drop`` and ``clear`` messages generated by feature deletion.

In addition to the regular options, Kafka allows control over the consumer behavior:

======================== ================================================================================
Argument                 Description
======================== ================================================================================
``--from-beginning``     Start reading messages from the beginning of the Kafka topic, instead of the end
``--num-consumers``      Number of consumers used to read the topic
======================== ================================================================================

The ``--num-consumers`` argument can be used to increase read speed. However, there can be at most one
consumer per topic partition.

The ``--from-beginning`` argument can be used to start reading the Kafka topic from the start. Otherwise,
only new messages that are sent after this command is invoked will be read.

``ingest``
^^^^^^^^^^

See :ref:`cli_ingest` for an overview of this command.

In addition to the regular options, Kafka allows the number of partitions and the replication factor of
the Kafka topic to be specified. In addition, an artificial delay can be inserted to simulate a live data stream.

======================== ==================================================
Argument                 Description
======================== ==================================================
``--partitions``         The number of partitions used for the Kafka topic
``--replication``        The replication factor for the Kafka topic
``--serialization``      The serialization format to use
``--delay``              The delay inserted between messages
======================== ==================================================

The ``--delay`` argument should be specified as a duration, in plain language. For example, ``100 millis``
or ``1 second``. The ingest will pause after creating each ``SimpleFeature`` for the specified delay.
This can be used to simulate a live data stream.

``playback``
^^^^^^^^^^^^

The playback command can simulate a data stream by replaying features from a file directly on to a Kafka Data Store.
Features are returned based on a
date attribute in the feature. For example, if replaying three features that have dates that are each one second apart,
each feature will be emitted after a delay of one second. The rate of export can be modified to speed up or slow down
the original time differences.

======================== =========================================================
Argument                 Description
======================== =========================================================
``-c, --catalog *``      The catalog table containing schema metadata
``-f, --feature-name *`` The name of the schema
``--dtg``                Date attribute to base playback on. If not specified,
                         will use the default schema date field
``--rate``               Rate multiplier to speed-up (or slow down) features being
                         returned, as a float
``--live``               Will modify the returned dates to match the current time
``--config``             Properties file used to configure the Kafka producer
``-s, --spec``           SimpleFeatureType specification as a GeoTools spec string, SFT config, or file with either
``-C, --converter``      GeoMesa converter specification as a config string, file name, or name of an available converter
``--input-format``       File format of input files (shp, csv, tsv, avro, etc). Optional, auto-detection will be attempted
``--src-list``           Input files are text files with lists of files, one per line, to ingest.
``--partitions``         The number of partitions used for the Kafka topic
``--replication``        The replication factor for the Kafka topic
``--serialization``      The serialization format to use
``--schema-registry``    URL to a Confluent Schema Registry
``<files>...``           Input files to ingest
======================== =========================================================

The playback command is an extension of the :ref:`cli_ingest` command, and accepts all the parameters outlined there.
However, playback cannot run in distributed mode.

Also, note that the input files (specified in ``--src-list`` or ``<files>...``) must be time-ordered by the ``--dtg``
attribute before ingest or the playback will not work as expected.

The ``--rate`` parameter can be used to speed up or slow down the replay. It is specified as a floating point
number. For example ``--rate 10`` will make replay ten times faster, while ``--rate 0.1`` will make replay
ten times slower.

The ``--src-list`` argument is useful when you have more files to ingest than the command line will allow you to
specify. This file instructs GeoMesa to treat input files as new-line-separated file lists. As this makes it very
easy to run ingest jobs that can take days it's recommended to split lists into reasonable chunks that can be completed
in a couple hours.

The ``--force`` argument can be used to suppress any confirmation prompts (generally from converter inference),
which can be useful when scripting commands.

The ``<files>...`` argument specifies the files to be ingested. ``*`` may be used as a wild card in file paths.
GeoMesa can handle **gzip**, **bzip** and **xz** file compression as long as the file extensions match the
compression type. GeoMesa supports ingesting files from local disks or HDFS. In addition, Amazon's S3
and Microsoft's Azure file systems are supported with a few configuration changes. See
:doc:`/user/cli/filesystems` for details. Note: The behavior of this argument is changed by the ``--src-list`` argument.

By using a single ``-`` for the input files, input data may be piped directly to the ingest command using standard
shell redirection. Note that this will only work in local mode, and will only use a single thread for ingestion.
Schema inference is disabled in this case, and progress indicators may not be entirely accurate, as the total size
isn't known up front.

For example::

    $ cat foo.csv | geomesa-accumulo ingest ... -
    $ geomesa-accumulo ingest ... - <foo.csv

``listen``
^^^^^^^^^^

This command behaves similarly to the ``export`` command (above), but it does not provide options
for filtering or output format. It will show each message on the Kafka topic, including ``drop`` and
``clear`` messages generated from feature deletion.

This command will not not terminate until it is cancelled (through a shell interrupt).

======================== ================================================================================
Argument                 Description
======================== ================================================================================
``-f, --feature-name *`` The name of the schema
``--from-beginning``     Start reading messages from the beginning of the Kafka topic, instead of the end
``--num-consumers``      Number of consumers used to read the topic
======================== ================================================================================

The ``--num-consumers`` argument can be used to increase read speed. However, there can be at most one
consumer per topic partition.

The ``--from-beginning`` argument can be used to start reading the Kafka topic from the start. Otherwise,
only new messages that are sent after this command is invoked will be read.

``migrate-zookeeper-metadata``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This command will migrate schema metadata out of Zookeeper. For additional information, see :ref:`no_zookeeper`.

======================== ================================================================================
Argument                 Description
======================== ================================================================================
``--delete``             Delete the metadata out of Zookeeper after migrating it
======================== ================================================================================
