# GeoMesa Elastic Map Reduce Bootstrap ScriptsScripts to bootstrap Accumulo and GeoMesa for [Elastic Map Reduce](https://aws.amazon.com/elasticmapreduce/)## Using the GeoMesa bootstrapYou can use the scripts staged to this publicly accessible s3 bucket:```s3://elasticmapreduce-geomesa/bootstrap-geomesa.sh```You can also put these scripts in any S3 bucket which your EMR instances will be able to access using thier IAM role. Be sure to update the path to `bootstrap-geomesa-lib.sh` in step #1 of `bootstrap-geomesa.sh`.The bootstrap requires EMR installation of Hadoop and ZooKeeper applications.### Example EMR commandThe command below is intended to launch the cluster into default VPC of the region specified.``` bashNUM_WORKERS=2CLUSTER_NAME=geomesa-emrAWS_REGION=us-east-1AWS_PROFILE=my_profileKEYPAIR_NAME=my_keypair # a keypair in the region (for which you have the private key)SUBNET_ID=subnet-abcd1234 # a subnet on the default VPC in the regionMASTER_SECURITY_GROUP=sg-1234abcdSLAVE_SECURITY_GROUP=sg-abcd1234aws emr create-cluster --applications Name=Hadoop Name=ZooKeeper-Sandbox \    --bootstrap-actions Path=s3://elasticmapreduce-geomesa/bootstrap-geomesa.sh,Name=geomesa-accumulo \    --ec2-attributes KeyName=$KEYPAIR_NAME,SubnetId=${SUBNET_ID},InstanceProfile=EMR_EC2_DefaultRole,EmrManagedSlaveSecurityGroup=${SLAVE_SECURITY_GROUP},EmrManagedMasterSecurityGroup=${MASTER_SECURITY_GROUP} \    --service-role EMR_DefaultRole \    --release-label emr-4.7.1 --name $CLUSTER_NAME \    --instance-groups InstanceCount=$NUM_WORKERS,InstanceGroupType=CORE,InstanceType=m3.xlarge InstanceCount=1,InstanceGroupType=MASTER,InstanceType=m3.xlarge \    --region $AWS_REGION \    --profile $AWS_PROFILE```## Good to know### Stage binaries on S3From the EMR instances, downloading the GeoMesa binaries is fastest over S3.  You can stage the latest release in a bucket which your EMR instance can access using their IAM role, preferably in the same region. Then set `GEOMESA_DIST_S3` in `bootstrap-geomesa.sh`.### Cluster environmentThe Accumulo instance name defaults to `accumulo`. It is set via `ACCUMULO_INSTANCE` in `bootstrap-geomesa-lib.sh`. The Accumulo `root` user password is set via `USERPW` in `bootstrap-geomesa.sh`.  By default it is `secret`.The ZooKeeper address is the hostname of the master instance, with the default port of 2181.An Accumulo namespace is set up for the GeoMesa version, following the pattern `geomesa_122`, that is `geomesa_` appended with the version number removing periods. Tables names prefixed with `${namespace}.` automatically have the GeoMesa distributed runtime jar on the classpath.On the master instance, user `hadoop` is set up with GeoMesa tools.  `$GEOMESA_HOME` set to `~hadoop/geomesa-tools-${GEOMESA_VERSION}`. The `$HADOOP_HOME` and `$ACCUMULO_HOME` are also set up to allow suppressing the `-i` and `-z` options when connecting to the accumulo instance through `geomesa` command line interface.### Logging of bootstrap stepsBootstrapping steps are logged to `/tmp/bootstrap-geomesa.log`.### ResizingEach node added to the CORE instance group will be bootstrapped as an Accumulo tablet server. It will pick up necessary distributed runtime jar via the Accumulo namespace.
